=pod

=head1 NAME

I<logdevourer> - log parsing daemon

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<logdevd> [ B<--daemon> ] [ B<--config>=I<config-file> ]
[ B<--state-dir>=I<state-dir> ]
[ B<--pid-file>=I<pidfile> ]
S<< I<options> ... >>

B<logdevd> B<--stdio> [ B<--config>=I<config-file> ]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<logdevourer> is a daemon that follows specified set of log files and log
sockets (L<tcp(7)>, L<udp(7)>, or L<unix(7)>), parses incoming entries into
JSON-compatible structure, and sends them to the configured outputs (typically
a locally running spooler, like Fluentd or L<messenger(8)> from Seismometer
Toolbox).

Considering L<rsyslogd(8)> alone, I<logdevourer> could be seen as excessive
daemon, as L<rsyslogd(8)> already can work with I<liblognorm>. On the other
hand, I<logdevourer> can also read logs produced outside syslog, and parsed
logs can be sent through the same channel as monitoring data, which allows
to derive additional metrics based on logs. I<logdevourer> has also simpler
output protocol and configuration, so it can be easily incorporated into
bigger infrastructure.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-c> I<config-file>, B<--config>=I<config-file>

configuration file, which specifies log sources, log destinations, path to
rules base, and other options (default: F</etc/logdevourer/logdevourer.conf>)

=item B<-l> I<logging-config>, B<--logging>=I<logging-config>

YAML-encoded logging configuration dictionary for Python; see
L<https://docs.python.org/2/howto/logging.html> and
C<logging.config.dictConfig()> Python function documentation for details

B<NOTE>: on Python 2.6 I<logdevourer> uses backported C<dictConfig()>, so it
works the same as on Python 2.7

=item B<-i>, B<--stdio>

ignore sources and destinations configuration, reading logs from I<STDIN> and
writing parse results to I<STDOUT> instead (this mode is mainly useful for
developing parsing rules); logging is disabled in this mode, unless
B<--logging> option was provided

=item B<-d>, B<--daemon>

run in background, detaching from terminal

=item B<-s> I<state-dir>, B<--state-dir>=I<state-dir>

state directory, used to save positions for log files (default:
F</var/lib/logdevourer/>)

=item B<-p> I<pidfile>, B<--pid-file>=I<pidfile>

file to write PID to (mainly useful for C<--daemon> option)

=item B<-u> I<user>, B<--user>=I<user>, B<-g> I<group>, B<--group>=I<group>

change UID and GID to these (default: no UID/GID change)

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

Configuration file is a YAML with three sections, C<sources> list,
C<destinations> list, and C<options> hash.

An example config could look like this:

  sources:
    - /var/log/auth.log
    - /var/log/daemon.log
    - /var/log/kern.log
    - /var/log/messages
    - /var/log/syslog
    - /var/log/user.log
    - {proto: udp, host: localhost, port: 9830}
    - {proto: unix, path: /var/run/logdevourer.sock}

  destinations:
    - {proto: unix, path: /var/run/messenger.sock, retry: true}

  options:
    rulebase: /etc/logdevourer/syslog.rules
    send_unparsed: true
    log_unparsed: false
    keep_original: false

=head2 Log Sources

Log source can be a string, meaning it's a path to a log file (typically
a syslog file, but it could be Apache's or nginx' log, for example). This file
is then followed in a similar manner to how S<< C<tail -f ...> >> works.
I<logdevourer> recognizes when the file was truncated, removed, or replaced
with a fresh file (like L<logrotate(8)> with different mixes of
I<copytruncate> and I<create> options works). If the log file doesn't exist at
the start time, I<logdevourer> will start watching it as soon as it becomes
available.

Log source can also be a hash with one of the following structures:

=over

=item C<< {"proto": "stdin"} >>

read logs from I<STDIN>

=item C<< {"proto": "unix", "path": I<socket path>} >>

receive logs on a datagram unix socket, one log entry per message (message may
end with newline character, but doesn't need to)

=item C<< {"proto": "tcp", "port": I<integer>} >>

=item C<< {"proto": "tcp", "host": I<bind address>, "port": I<integer>} >>

receive logs on a TCP socket (I<bind address> may be a DNS name or IP
address)

=item C<< {"proto": "udp", "port": I<integer>} >>

=item C<< {"proto": "udp", "host": I<bind address>, "port": I<integer>} >>

receive logs on an UDP socket (I<bind address> may be a DNS name or IP
address)

=back

=head2 Log Destinations

Since I<logdevourer>'s main purpose is to follow log files, its network output
is not a sophisticated one. If some sort of data spooling and/or retransmition
is required (and pretty much always is), some other daemon running along with
I<logdevourer> is necessary.

This other daemon's location can be pointed in following ways:

=over

=item C<< "stdout" >> or C<< {"proto": "stdout"} >>

write parse results to I<STDOUT>

=item C<< {"proto": "unix", "path": I<socket path>} >>

=item C<< {"proto": "unix", "path": I<socket path>, "retry": true} >>

=item C<< {"proto": "unix", "path": I<socket path>, "retry": false} >>

send parse results to datagram unix socket; first two forms cause
I<logdevourer> to hold whole parsing in case of a send error (e.g. the
process on the receiving end of the socket was restarted), while the last form
causes the messages to be simply dropped

=item C<< {"proto": "tcp", "host": I<address>, "port": I<address>} >>

send parse results to TCP socket, holding the whole parsing in case of network
problems

=item C<< {"proto": "udp", "host": I<address>, "port": I<address>} >>

send parse results to UDP socket, ignoring any network errors

=back

I<STDOUT> and I<TCP> outputs write JSON objects, one per line. I<UDP> and
I<unix> outputs send a JSON object per message, and messages B<do not end>
with a newline character.

=head2 Options

=over

=item C<< rulebase >> (path)

path to the I<liblognorm> rules file; see L</RULES PRIMER>

=item C<< send_unparsed >> (boolean, default C<true>)

whether to send or suppress messages in case of parse failure (i.e.
unrecognized message format); see L</OUTPUT FORMAT>

=item C<< log_unparsed >> (boolean, default C<false>)

whether to log parse failures

=item C<< keep_original >> (boolean, default C<false>)

if set to C<true>, I<logdevourer> will store the unparsed message under
C<"originalmsg"> key along with all the other fields extracted from the
message

=back

=head1 OUTPUT FORMAT

There are two kinds of output messages. One is when parsing succeeds, and all
the log fields are gathered in a message. Such message looks like:

  {"event.tags": ["tag1", "tag2", ...],
    "date": "Mar 18 14:17:33", "host": "onyx", ...}

C<"event.tags"> is a special key that carries list of tags the rule has
specified. The key is missing if the rule has no tags. The rest of the keys
are the named matches from the matching rule.

If no rule matched, a message with two keys, C<"originalmsg"> and
C<"unparsed-data">, is generated. C<"originalmsg"> contains the whole log
entry, and C<"unparsed-data"> contains only the part that I<liblognorm>
couldn't parse. Example message looks like this:

  {"originalmsg": "Mar 18 14:17:33 onyx daemon[7721]: some event",
    "unparsed-data": "some event"}

Of course messages of this type are suppressed when C<"send_unparsed"> in
configuration is set to C<false>.

=head1 RULES PRIMER

This guide is by no means exhaustive. It's just to provide most of the
information related to I<logdevourer> in one place. For full syntax
description and complete list of available fields see I<liblognorm>'s
manual.

=head2 Syntax

A rule line starts with C<"rule=">, followed by (possibly empty) list of tags,
separated from the rule itself with a colon C<":">.

  # comments start with a hash sign
  rule=tag1, tag2, ...:literal text
  rule=:literal text, no tags

Note the leading colon in the second rule.

If necessary, characters can be specified in C<"\x##"> form, C<"##"> being
a two-digit hexadecimal character code. Useful values are:

=over

=item C<"\x3a"> == C<":">

=item C<"\x25"> == C<"%">

=item C<"\x20"> == C<" ">

=item C<"\x2c"> == C<",">

=back

A literal percent sign C<"%"> can also be encoded as C<"%%"> where it makes
sense.

Variable parts of the message are denoted with C<"%field_name:format%"> or
C<"%field_name:format:args%"> placeholders. Several possible formats can be
found in L</Field Types> section, with full list in I<liblognorm>'s manual.

  prefix=%date:date-rfc3164% %host:word%\x20
  # ...
  rule=dhcp_discover:dhcpd: DHCPDISCOVER from %mac:word% via %iface:word%
  rule=dhcp_discover:dhcpd: DHCPDISCOVER from %mac:word% via %iface:char-to:\x3a%: %message:rest%

If the format is important, but the actual value is to be ignored, field name
can be set to C<"-">.

  prefix=%date:date-rfc3164% %host:word%\x20
  # ...
  rule=:dhcpd: %-:number% bad udp checksums in %-:number% packets

A field named C<"*"> is special: it means that the field is a JSON hash, and
the resulting message should be populated with its content (fields defined in
the parsing rule have the precedence).

B<NOTE>: This behaviour has nothing to do with I<liblognorm>, it's specific to
I<logdevourer>.

  prefix=%date:date-rfc3164% %host:word%\x20
  # ...
  rule=:harpd[%pid:number%]: %*:json%
  # or alternatively:
  rule=:harpd[%pid:number%]: %*:rest%

These two rules have a subtle difference. The first rule causes JSON to be
deserialized by I<liblognorm> (JSON field type is supported since 1.1.2),
while in the second one it's I<logdevourer>'s job. The latter of course works
with I<liblognorm> 1.1.1.

If many rules share a common prefix, like syslog messages, it's useful to
define it in advance. Prefix applies to the rules that follow it, until it is
changed. Default value is empty string (C<"">).

The format is similar as for C<rule=...> lines, except for the tags part.

  # traditional syslog format
  prefix=%date:date-rfc3164% %host:word%\x20

Note the trailing space (encoded for visibility as C<"\x20">). It needs to go
either to the prefix or to each of the rules.

Messages that are results of parsing can be annotated. Such annotations only
apply to the messages with specific tag, and can add static text to the
message. A tag can have multiple annotations.

  annotate=dhcp_discover:+program="dhcpd"
  annotate=dhcp_discover:+event="DISCOVER"

=head2 Field Types

=over

=item C<< %field:number% >>

decimal number (a sequence of digits), returned as the original string

=item C<< %field:float% >>

floating point number, returned as the original string

=item C<< %field:whitespace% >> (new in I<liblognorm> 1.1.2)

one or more whitespace characters

=item C<< %field:word% >>

one or more non-whitespace characters, until the next whitespace or end of
line

=item C<< %field:string-to:SEPARATOR% >>

one or more characters, up to C<SEPARATOR> string

=item C<< %field:alpha% >>

one or more characters from C</[a-zA-Z]/> set

=item C<< %field:char-to:C% >>

one or more characters, up to C<C> character

=item C<< %field:rest% >>

any remaining string

=item C<< %field:date-rfc3164% >>

date in C<< %b %e %H:%M:%S >> format (with slightly different formats allowed)

=item C<< %field:date-rfc5424% >>

date in C<< %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S.%2N%:z >> format (with slightly different
formats allowed)

=item C<< %field:ipv4% >>

IPv4 address, in dot-decimal notation (e.g. C<127.0.0.1>)

=item C<< %field:ipv6% >> (new in I<liblognorm> 1.1.2)

IPv6 address, in RFC 4291 format, followed either by end of string or
a whitespace

=item C<< %field:mac48% >> (new in I<liblognorm> 1.1.2)

IEEE 802 MAC address, with digit pairs separated by either colons (C<":">) or
hyphens (C<"-">) (e.g. C<00:00:00:00:00:00> or C<FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF>)

=item C<< %field:regex:RE% >>

Perl-compatible regexp (see L<pcre(3)> for syntax); B<NOTE>: only when
I<liblognorm> was compiled with PCRE support, which is not the default build
option

=item C<< %field:json% >> (new in I<liblognorm> 1.1.2)

JSON hash object, including any whitespace that follows it

=back

=head1 SIGNALS

=over

=item I<SIGTERM>, I<SIGINT>

Terminate daemon.

=item I<SIGHUP>

Reload configuration, list of sources and destinations, and I<liblognorm>
rules.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over

=item F</etc/logdevourer/logdevourer.conf> - configuration file

=item F</etc/logdevourer/syslog.rules.example> - example of I<liblognorm> rules

=item F</var/lib/logdevourer/> - state directory

=item F</var/run/logdevourer.pid> - pidfile

=back

=head1 TODO

Some backpressure mechanism, for destination daemon to signal network
problems. This would limit necessary message spooling.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<liblognorm home page|http://www.liblognorm.com/> and
L<documentation|http://www.liblognorm.com/files/manual/configuration.html>

L<Seismometer Toolbox|http://seismometer.net/toolbox/> (L<messenger(8)>)

L<Fluentd|http://www.fluentd.org/>

=cut
